yeah so thank you so much for for
joining us today dr mike
yeah of course thank you so much for
having me i'm really excited to have
this conversation
um oh really what what is this con are
we
what are we talking about well i think
we're talking about how
the mind and the body are actually
mind-body not two separate words so
um i'm hopeful that you know i can
sort of bring up the subject of how
interconnected these two subjects
are and then get your take on your
experiences maybe personally maybe
professionally
if you agree or disagree with some of
the statements that i make i always like
for these to be as
personal and conversational as possible
but if you have a different
way of doing it in mind i'm all yours
yeah so sometimes when people come on or
actually usually when people come on
we'll have like something more of a
personal conversation where you know i
think a lot of people
are interested to hear actually like
your story
and and kind of um sometimes people will
come on and we'll have
uh you know particular questions that um
or sometimes they're facing challenges
and
and potentially want to work through
some of those but i i recognize that you
know as
both being like medical professionals
like we could have a conversation about
something instead of doing
a more traditional like personal
interview kind of thing
so i'm really game for both um it really
depends on
you know what yeah i'd love to have a
conversation about the subject
of the the mind body connection and from
there if we have personal anecdotes to
work those in
uh i i'm open to sharing some stuff so
that's cool
so let's get started so tell me about
the mind body
connection yeah so for me um
just to give a little background i'm a
board-certified family medicine doctor
uh but i happen to be a d.o not an md
which is an equally licensed medical
licensed degree
in the united states and basically the
premise of our education in comparison
to that of
md education is we really try and put
forth a holistic
patient forward approach to everything
and anything that we do in the field of
health care
this could mean something as simple as a
patient coming in with acid reflux
symptoms
and instead of simply fixing the acid
reflux to a medication
we would do that but in addition to look
at some of the risk factors that that
patient might have in their everyday
lives that are predisposing them to
continually having
this acid reflux condition and as a
result we kind of take a bigger picture
approach
when it comes to treating patients
using that background i've started
treating
a lot of patients for pain
because what would happen is any time a
colleague in my hospital
in a nearby hospital in urgent care
would run into a patient who's having
chronic pain issues
or perhaps an acute pain condition they
would
end up sending them to me as a referral
for osteopathic treatment
because in addition to this patient
first philosophy that we have in do
schools we also learn an
extra hands-on technique called omt
and it's not really one technique it's
more of a therapy it's more of a way of
thinking
it's not magical it may look somewhat
like
physical therapy like chiropractic
medicine but in theory it's more
medical in nature in that we use the
body's own mechanisms that
no one disagrees with in the medical
community to try and help patients out
with their pain
or perhaps with the dysfunction that's
causing them a
concern so an example this could be
a patient having recurrent tension
headaches as a result of spasms in their
neck
uh a proper and osteopathic exam could
go into
what their work ergonomic situation is
like are they sitting in the right chair
where where's their monitor
in relationship to their eye level then
putting our hands on the neck feeling
where the dysfunction comes from
checking the joints above and below
meaning that if it's the neck
uh we're checking the thoracic region as
well and not just forgetting that the
cervical spine is connected to the
thoracic spine and there's impacts of
that
checking for shoulder dysfunctions
seeing if a patient is using one
shoulder over another because of
another injury that exists and then
figuring out a way to
treat that condition whether it's
through using the body's own reflexes to
relax
this spasm because the body has a lot of
these innate reflexes in it where it
uh essentially turns on some muscles and
turns on other muscles
i'll give you an example if you ever try
pushing against a stationary object like
a wall
or a pole and you know that object's not
moving
what your mind tends to do is actually
send signals to those muscles that are
being activated during this isometric
contraction where the muscle is not
lengthening not shortening
is to relax because it doesn't like to
waste energy on something where there is
no eccentric or concentric motion
happening
so we use that body's response to an
isometric contraction in order to induce
relaxation
and increase range of motion in spasm
areas that's fascinating i wonder if
actually that i i never connected
the isometric contraction i wonder if
actually that is partially responsible
for the clinical superiority of
exercises like especially yoga which are
essentially isometric contractions right
because you take a position and you hold
it
and whether that because i know that
yoga is sort of superior to physical
exercise in terms of
recruiting like or shutting down the hpa
axis
and i never thought i never realized
that there was actually a mechanism that
involves isometric contraction that
induces relaxation but that sort of
because i've been always curious why
yoga
sometimes outperforms exercise in
clinical trials and this is the first
time that i've ever heard of a
potential physiologic mechanism through
which it acts
fast yeah and there's another level why
yoga is
probably superior in a lot of instances
because of breathing the hpa axis
is directly affected upon our
sympathetic or parasympathetic state
and we can control that state based on
how we control our breathing
and this is where i can throw in a
personal anecdote i'm horrible at
controlling my breathing
i tend to hold my breath a lot maybe not
when i'm doing weight lifting but
if i'm bending over to tie my shoe i
catch myself holding my breath to focus
on tying the shoe even though it's such
a simple task
but when we do that we actually start
decreasing our ability to heal our
ability to breathe properly
and yoga really institutes proper
breathing mechanics where it's
diaphragmatic breathing
belly coming out lower ribcage spreading
out to the sides
and you can practice this not even just
doing yoga through a mindfulness session
and that's where i think a lot of the
benefits of yoga comes from probably
those two
instances and while isometric
contraction is really crucial in yoga
eccentric contraction which a lot of
times is missed out on when you're doing
weight training i'll give an example so
if you're pushing a weight like you're
doing a bench press
uh the eccentric contraction is when
you're bringing the weight down
where the muscle essentially slowly
lengthening but still contracting
to control the the lengthening process
yeah that is a very good way
to rehabilitate your muscles injured
muscles it's actually
the best form of rehabilitation so if
you have like
a achilles injury a calf injury
these types of eccentric contractions is
what your physical therapist is likely
to focus on first
so yoga in in contradiction to like when
we push our weights down and then drop
them real quickly and then push them
back
up really focuses on that eccentric
isometric phase the breathing phase
and that's where you get so much of the
benefit obviously in addition to the
mindfulness component of it so i'm glad
you brought up yoga i don't know if
eccentric contractions is also something
in the back of your mind or something
you've heard before what are your
thoughts on that
no so i'm i'm not so i'm not familiar
with this degree of
um you know physiology around muscle
contraction like it's certainly not
it's not something that i've like
studied extensively so it's fascinating
to hear i mean i if you asked me what an
eccentric contraction was i wouldn't
even i wouldn't even know
it's interesting because when i think
about yoga though i think you know most
of yoga is not actually about movement
it's about stillness
so if i had to put my money somewhere
i'd say that you know the isometric
component of yoga
generally speaking outweighs the
eccentric component
but at the same time you certainly have
compared to regular exercise a very
significant amount of eccentric
muscular movement right because it's
about slow movements that involve like
gradually moving from one place to the
other
um you know so you definitely have that
it's interesting i
i wasn't i never connected those dots
like i didn't realize
um you know i have some theories about
how yoga works and stuff like that but i
just didn't have the resolution of
understanding of
muscular physiology to really connect
those dots that was fascinating
yeah i think that highlights why
osteopathic medicine is so cool because
we
think so holistically in our approach
that when a patient comes in
with musculoskeletal pain of the neck
while we are thinking about this
approach
we're simultaneously thinking about the
anatomy of the region for
you know real like medical interventions
whether it's medicinal
uh injection based surgical approaches
and it's not that i do all of these
approaches
but i keep them in the back of my mind
when i'm trying to figure out which
patient
is best suitable for these options and
in thinking this way and seeing so many
patients who were in pain
over and over and over again i began to
see a relationship between
the mental health state of my patients
in addition to
their um pain that they were
experiencing or physical symptoms that
they were experiencing
and while it's very easy to conflate
this correlation and say oh well of
course someone that's in pain is going
to be in an unhappier mental state who's
going to be happy when they're in pain
that is in fact true but what i started
seeing in doing thorough histories of my
patients is that
the mental health state preceded
the physical pain and once the mental
health state
was treated because it was largely
overlooked in their past
treatments that's when the physical pain
went away
because i would have patients come in
and they would start saying you know
their elbow pain was bothering them for
six months
they've had mris cat scans x-rays you
know doctors would do special tests and
there was nothing to be found
anatomically
but this is not to say that this patient
is making this up
what the reality is they were still
subjectively feeling this pain
it was debilitating to them because it
prevented them from doing their work or
enjoying their life
so it was real it just the source wasn't
anatomical
and a lot of times our healthcare system
falters here because
if they can't point to something on an
imaging scan
we right away start writing this patient
off or we stop being able to help them
because it's not reimbursable well by
insurance companies because we can't say
look this is what they have this is why
we're doing x for z
and i did a lot of research into this
field and i came across
a great book called the divided mind by
dr john sarno
the late dr john sarno actually and
his field of research is he's by
training or he was by training a
physical medicine and rehabilitation
specialist the pm in our physician
so he wasn't the mental health
specialist by any means
and he actually worked and taught at nyu
medical school
um at nyu medical center just by me
and through his research he actually
found
that helping patients deal with some of
their most
repressed childhood potentially
current negative life situations
mental health situations treating those
actually yielded better results for his
pain patients his chronic pain patients
his acute injury patients and he started
doing research on this
where it wasn't just okay let's see this
patient let's see if they improved he
actually started doing mri studies can i
jump in for a second by the way should i
call this mike or dr michael
mike is fine mike is fine um so let me
ask you what do you think is the
mechanism of that how does that work
um i don't know i don't have a good
answer for it yet
there are definitely proposed mechanisms
his research focused on
for example if you had a true injury
let's say in your low back
and you had a pulled muscle in the past
what he saw
in mri studies at mri research that
individuals when they were in a
stressful state
the body actually limited the amount of
blood flow to those areas
in order to decrease their stress
and this was a high level of stress of
thinking about those
repressed thoughts those acute stress
thoughts and instead focused
on a physical problem that low back pain
and it functioned as a distraction to
not
overwhelm the body the mind
and this was a theory and this is a very
out there theory and some
physicians disagree with this theory it
was the route he chose to explore
it's actually not that out there in fact
there's good evidence to support that
because
if you look at self-injurious behavior
so self-injurious behavior that's not
suicidal like cutting and
burning and things like that these are
actually not injuries that
if you really look at self-injurious
behavior it's fascinating because from
an evolutionary standpoint
what people do is the thing that causes
the least damage to their body
and also hurts the most
so if you look at cutting it's very
superficial cuts
and so if you think about what's that
person actually doing and if you talk to
people who engage in self-injurious
behavior what you actually find
is that they their goal in the
self-injurious behavior is almost
meditative in nature
that that eliciting a cut slowly like
time and time and time again actually
distracts them from
emotional feelings and the intensity of
the pain is so
great that they literally cannot think
about anything else
so what we tend to find is that you know
when i work with people who have
self-injurious behavior
and an addiction that if you control the
addiction like let's say they're in a
rehab
the self-injurious behavior will get
worse because they need a coping
mechanism
because they can't use like alcohol or
marijuana or like other things to cope
so it's really fascinating because i've
never you know i i'm not familiar with
with
dr sarno's work but like there's
actually a decent
understanding that people will actually
induce that principle of utilizing pain
as a distraction from the mind um
absolutely
it doesn't actually sound that out there
to me it's like that's actually well
i probably misspoke when i'm saying that
it's somewhat out there in that
we definitely know that that sort of
distraction method exists as you said
the mechanism with the mind altering
blood flow
is the mechanism that is somewhat
questionable interesting so that it's
it's
less of the patient doing it and more
like it's like an automatic
physiological you know
neurophysiological like
we're not going to fix this injury to
protect our mind
yeah that that certainly does seem uh
you know less understood
that's that's cool so but that's one of
the mechanisms i mean for me the way
that i think about it as an osteopathic
physician
is that not only do we have electro
co connections in our body from neurons
but we also have
neurochemical connections with
neurotransmitters with
hormones that are impacted upon our
stress levels the way that we feel
and if we're constantly that hyper
parasympathetic state
i know that my patient isn't going to
have good circulation of their neck
because what happens when we're in a
hyper sympathetic state
we're locked in so everything is
tightened there's less circulation
happening just because of this state
but then you're less likely to look at
your surroundings look up and down
and therefore you have less range of
motion and when you have less range of
motion you
basically develop like a frozen shoulder
situation just of your neck
and therefore you propagate the injury
moving forward
so a lot of the work that i do with my
patients even though they're coming in
for a physical symptom
is exploring some of this mental health
side of what they're doing
and i'm by no means a mental health
specialist i'm not a psychiatrist i'm
not a psychologist
well you're an iphone i'm an fm doc
but i broach the subject with them and i
gauge their interest level in continuing
this
line of communication and once i see
that they have
a layer of interest and they want to
pursue and they've seen some good
initial
outcomes we then connect them to a
mental health specialist who can
actually continue this work with them
but unless i'm going to be the one
screening for it catching this early
they're never going to see the mental
health specialist in order to get there
so that's why i find the beauty of
family medicine and osteopathic medicine
combining
in a place where i actually have patient
contact at a time when they're
experiencing this pain
and probably when they're most motivated
to seek help even though
they may have come in for a sore arm and
yet we're now talking about their
childhood
and how things are going in life it's a
conversation they didn't expect
yeah absolutely mike do you mind if i
ask you like a couple of questions just
a little bit about your
your training and stuff yeah so i've
noticed that you've highlighted the fact
that you're an osteopathic physician
like several times and you're short
sort of sharing principles of osteopathy
um can you just help me a little bit
uh understand a little bit about you
know
what's the reason that you kind of
highlight things that way
that you kind of draw that distinction
yeah so
when i was uh in high school i had
options of where i wanted to go
for college and then thinking about
medical school in the future because i
knew it was something i was passionate
about
and when my father actually immigrated
from russia to the united states at age
40 i was six years old at the time
he actually went to medical school and
residency all over again
in the united states and he happened to
go to an osteopathic school the same
school that i attended
and i got to witness him learning omt
the principles
of being a do and it became part of my
innate knowledge
of how i treat patients it's become
something that i'm very proud of
because historically in the united
states there has been some stigma
around osteopathic physicians as being
perhaps too
alternative or not thinking about
medications enough and a lot of this
stems from what osteopathic physicians
are not physicians
osteopathy practitioners are across the
globe
for their for example in some countries
in europe and in asia
they are not fully licensed medical
doctors and they do only perhaps perform
omt and that is such an important
distinction to be made because here in
the united states we are fully licensed
we can practice across any specialty we
can get board certified any specialty
when we do our residency training our
now programs are combined
all of them this just happened not too
long ago my program where i did my
family medicine training i was trained
alongside
mds and do's and after a while we forgot
who was an md and who is a do because
our principles align so much that we
took away what they learned in school
they took away what we learned in school
and it really became merged
so much so that if i'm being honest the
differences in
md and do education is shrinking year to
year
because the mda curriculum is learning
how well this holistic approach works
that they've incorporated into their own
uh honestly mike that's that's why i was
a little bit surprised by you
highlighting because i like in my mind
like
whether someone is an md or do um
you know i i don't like i fully
understand
uh that you know osteopathy has a
different perspective that you all learn
omt and we don't
i in my experience honestly of do versus
md school is that
you all learn everything that we learn
and you guys learn extra stuff
yeah you know i think it also came from
the idea that
the entrance exams and grades initially
to get into osteopathic schools were
somewhat lower
in that they were taking non-traditional
applicants perhaps those who are going
into their second career
uh immigrant applicants and as a result
people just looked at the scores and
said oh well if i want to be competitive
and go to the highest
specialty possible you know plastic
surgery ophthalmology
i'll have a better shot by becoming an
md and that sort of changed the patient
the student selection for who went to
each school
but now i think it's changing because
now we see do
medical students and do doctors across
all these specialties
and you know at some of the highest
positions in the united states
the former president uh personal
physician
the current president's personal
physician both were do's
one is obviously still a deo and um the
the head of medicine for nasa as a do
we we really are now starting to expand
into being everywhere
but i still bring up the concept of
osteopathy because it's really my
foundation as to why i think
holistically it happened because of my
education
and in seeing how my md colleagues were
trained it's not that they got a lower
form of education they're brilliant
physicians
it was just with a slightly different
focus but i honestly think that focus is
changing and it's shifting for the
better
what what would you say is the
difference in the focus that your md
colleagues got
they had an intense understanding of the
physiology
and the pathophysiology behind
conditions
but less of the psychosocial components
less of the communication component and
i can give a very concrete example here
when i went in as a third year student
uh into my clinicals into my internal
medicine rotation
in inner city brooklyn i was very
comfortable performing physical exams
because from year one as a do you're uh
working on your other classmates doing
osteopathic manipulative therapy so
you're
getting used to what it's like to feel
normal structures on a body
you're getting used to interacting with
different uh
people different shapes different sizes
etc so when i came in
i was very ready to talk to a patient to
feel what was going on
to feel perhaps a tumor earlier than
other colleagues of mine so i i think
that that
helped me in a way to be a better
physician
and again every school is different
every residency program is different
i only highlight this because that
stigma that existed
probably 10 20 years ago more so than it
does today against ceos
to really highlight the fact that not
only are we so similar each year we're
becoming more and more similar
absolutely man so i mike i'm noticing
that you know a lot of your
it sounds like you've thought a lot
about what you're sharing today like
it sounds um you know very well
organized
i i can sort of see that the teacher
inside you coming out
um and and so i'm a little bit honestly
curious about because it sounds like you
sort of
you know it sounds like you kind of
figured things out bro i
appreciate you saying that um i probably
should prepare
more for when i give presentations but i
like for it to come from an
organic place because as i present
information like this
i'm actually at the same time while i'm
presenting it trying to re-understand
and process it myself
so that if i say something that doesn't
make sense it's because i'm actively
trying to listen to myself speak
kind of a way that i uh fact check
myself
especially when making youtube videos
and social media content so
i tend not to like to prepare for things
like this because
i wanted to be like you're a patient or
you're a friend of mine who's asking me
these questions and we're just having a
conversation about it
yeah absolutely so i'm not i'm not
getting the sense that you're over
prepared at all but i i just i'm hearing
a certain organization
to your you know the way you're kind of
talking and like
it really sounds like i'm talking to a
teacher it reminds me
of being in class like in medical school
where you know
i and i i totally get that you don't
know everything but at the same time
what i'm hearing is
a very um you know strong and consistent
representation of
when you work with a patient when you
kind of think holistically
you've noticed that there are very
real mental components that will
contribute to someone's physical pain
um and i mean i you know i i don't
i kind of i'm with you yeah i mean i i
love that we're on the same page on that
because for me i've always been a
curious individual i think my uh
either my college or medical school
application
uh title was essay title was why am i
always hungry
and it was hungry for knowledge and
whenever i see a patient
i always treat every interaction as uh
like one interaction and then i think
about it later what could i do to
improve that interaction or what i could
do better to be
a better doctor and i think about the
unanswered questions i have
and i think about that not just for
osteopathic principles but also for
like if a patient comes in for strep
throat why am i giving antibiotics for
strep throat
the the scary reality is if we ask most
doctors why we treat strep throat
i think most doctors won't know the
answer to that question like they're
going to say oh to get better faster or
they'll say oh because that's cardiac
complications bro
right yeah cardiac complications
rheumatic fever
and the reality is if you don't take uh
antibiotics
the symptoms will only on average be 16
hours longer
so it's not like patients think oh i
need to get my antibiotics so i can get
better quicker
not really going to happen and we're
really preventing complications like you
said cardiac rheumatic fever any
potentially kidney complications
but most doctors don't know that they
think they're just treating the bacteria
where the bacteria here is not so much a
threat as if it spreads it becomes
problematic and even then
it's a thin line as we study more and
more how often should we be doing this
what's the risk versus benefit in doing
this
and we're starting to continually
explore our knowledge here that's why i
fell in love with medicine because we're
continually learning we're continually
fact checking ourselves because even in
an era like this where misinformation's
so prominent
people are like the science is wrong no
science is never wrong scientists are
wrong doctors are wrong
the science is never wrong the science
is the process that helps us figure out
that we were wrong or that our
hypotheses were wrong
so i love reading about that studying
that and applying it to my everyday
sort of patients and such mike i find
that the things that i'm the most
curious about are actually like more
you as opposed to your patient
interactions because it's fascinating to
hear
um you know maybe it's because i'm a
psychiatrist but speaking holistically
like here we are having a conversation
about mind-body connection
and what i'm sort of seeing is the
person underneath
like so you're asking the question but
what i'm really find myself kind of
curious about is like
who is the person asking the question i
mean just so far
you know because i think you like i said
i think you've explained everything
really well i mean you clearly know what
you're talking about
and so what i'm kind of curious about
because you sort of don't
leave questions unanswered in the way
that you speak i think you do a really
good job of
of you know kind of laying things out
offering examples things like that
sharing personal anecdotes and it really
gets woven together like quite
beautifully
but what i find myself being curious
about is you know who is the person who
wrote that essay
what was it like to have a dad who was
an osteopathic physician and you kind of
said that like you grew up with this
stuff right
and so i'm kind of thinking a little bit
about like if we want to change
medicine to be a little bit more
holistic like honestly the stuff that i
want to ask you like i'm sure i could
ask you questions about
you know how you approach acid reflux
but to be honest what i'm the most
curious about is actually like
you yeah i know i mean absolutely if you
want to venture into that i'm happy to
talk about anything i consider myself
uh one of those people on social media
that treats life like an open book
so uh whatever questions or whichever
direction you want to take this you're
the host
you lead the way yeah so if i ask
anything that you think is kind of out
of line or you don't feel comfortable
answering you know just feel free but
like i was just curious so it sounds
like you
you i mean you moved to the united
states at the age of six
can you tell me a little bit about what
what you remember about
russia and yeah i don't remember much
um i just remember leaving very abruptly
um
my one story that i remember that i tell
quite often is a really funny story i
remember i guess my entrepreneurial
sense was even very healthy back then
where my dad went to the food market and
bought some
pears home and corn on the cob home
and i was eating some corn on the cob in
the playground and some of the older
kids were like oh we want some corn
and i'm like well i have some corn
upstairs they're like oh we'll buy it
from you at a markup so i ran upstairs
and then i realized we had no more corn
left because my whole family ate it
so instead i brought outside pears and i
said okay i'll
sell you these pairs and i started
selling pairs at like
5x the cost which is still not that much
money obviously
uh to everyone on the playground
grandparents kids older kids etc
and i brought home and i showed my dad
the money i'm like look
and like very surprising to me my dad
yells at me and says
how dare you rip people off um get you
have to go back and give everyone
back their money and i gave everyone
back their money some people wouldn't
take it back they were like no you sold
me the pair i knew what i was getting
and you keep it
and he came with me and we went to those
people's houses and he made me give it
back and
they laughed and they took their money
back but um
i don't know why that story stuck in my
head i guess it might have been a
dramatic experience of sorts but
that is what sticks with me most uh from
my russian experience
i mean i'm not hearing traumatic what
i'm hearing the word i'd use is
formative
perhaps yep right so like sometimes i
understand why you kind of go towards
traumatic because a lot of times we
think of dramatic experiences as
formative
you know they shape the way that we look
at things but i i mean
what what do you think it was that your
dad was trying to like like
teach you there like what'd you come
away with
i think he was probably going for
fairness
equality making sure that i'm never
unethical or moral in my dealings
and i think it definitely stuck i mean
in the work that we do
on my social media channel i think i
don't know if it's directly because of
that situation obviously but the way
that i was raised definitely affects the
way that i run
social media as a business entity like i
don't know like a lot of
you know youtubers sell merch and while
i think it's great to make money from
your audience i feel like i'm already so
blessed with the success that i've had
we like to do it all for charity or we
have a patreon
and again we're taking money from the
audience instead we decide every month
where collectively as a group where
we're going to donate that money
and i like to do good as much as i can
in addition to you know succeeding on my
own like i i would want it to be a
universal success as much as possible
i i'm not in favor when i say that the
communist model by any means we left
russia for
a reason but um if people are working
for it i want them to succeed as much as
possible and
witnessing my immigrant family go
through it i think that definitely
instilled some strong morals in me and
that was a formative experience for sure
what do you mean by watching your
immigrant family go through it
um well coming to the united states you
know we're very poor
we lived on welfare for the first few
years here in the u.s
especially when my father was in school
my mom was a phd math professor
at an esteemed university in russia when
coming here she didn't speak english
so she was sweeping floors to make ends
meet
she was saving money on bus fare like
the dollar
bus fare or what it was at the time and
would walk two three miles to work every
day
like there was this russian saying that
i frequently revisit in my videos called
cheers and it means going through i
can't
that's the very literal translation of
it but um
it's almost like nike's just do it i
guess my dad was a fan of nike back in
the
early 90s can you help me that sounds
like a cool
saying can you explain what what the
meaning of it is going through i can't
yeah so when things get going it's
basically pushing through the struggles
uh you know there's plenty of great
quotes out there michael jordan one
sticks out of my head of if there's an
obstacle in front of you
think about going through it think about
going over it think about you know
digging underneath
uh i'm probably butchering that quote
but i'm paraphrasing uh i see so like
that's sort of
working through i can't like yeah like
you don't wanna say i can't
this is hard don't let that emotion stop
you from whatever it is you're seeking
to accomplish
wow so it sounds like you're you know
your parents worked
really hard and and really had uh
i mean it's got to be tough to go
through my parents um
both my parents were medical doctors
thankfully they didn't have to repeat
medical school but they you know they
did residency over here
um and and i i mean
it must have been tough for your dad to
repeat medical school and go through
residency
again i try and put myself in his shoes
and say okay like i'm a doctor now
what's going to take in 10 years for me
to be so unhappy living in the united
states that i'm going to move to another
country let's say china
and learn chinese and while i'm learning
chinese go to a chinese medical school
and then a residency like
i don't know how bad it needs to get and
how motivated i have to be
10 years from now to want to do that but
it shows the level of dedication that he
had
for the success of myself and my sister
for us to
have a good childhood and grow up with
opportunities because that's essentially
why he came here and why we
brought her family here and faced all
these risks
and you said you kind of grew up with
that holistic perspective at home like
um you know do you have a sense of
whether your dad like because i
assume he went to like a md school in in
russia
and so do you have a sense of like you
know how his perspective changed or what
it means to grow up with a holistic
perspective at school
i mean at home yeah i don't know if he
ever went into depth
uh i think it happened through an
osmosis type of knowledge transfer where
he would be practicing omt
for his boards or for his exams and he
would be practicing on me
and at the time i was an athlete i was
doing taekwondo for about eight nine
years i was going to tournaments
regularly getting
injured and him working on me and also
helping me focus
on school and giving me these mental
health sort of boosts by telling me i
need to go through i can't
i think that sort of presented that
holistic picture
and whether it came from the medical
school that he was attending or that's
who he was as a person before
it's hard for me to say can you tell me
about taekwondo
yeah so that was a a really long part of
my childhood
when i was six right away they enrolled
me in this program
um it was like three four days a week a
lot of training
uh i was getting pretty good at it too
where i was deciding or at least
considering
trying out for the u.s olympic team wow
and yeah i won some like national
tournaments and stuff
for sparring and i was really excited
about it but then with school and i
moved
to a different city i kind of lost track
with it and
started playing other sports i became
like the captain of my high school
soccer team played that
for a while and then when i went into my
seven year combined
undergrad med school program uh when you
were an undergrad they didn't allow you
to play sports because you were taking
so many credits it would break the ncaa
rules so
i didn't play any collegiate sports
except some intramural stuff here and
there
wow how mike i'm i'm fascinated i mean
how do you understand
why i mean how does someone become
you know a national taekwondo champion
[Music]
captain of the soccer team like
like how do you do that
i mean i don't know i was just i it
wasn't some
pre-thought out plan that i had um i
think
i'm athletic genetically i'm tall i'm
lean
so um i was training from an early age
i think any time that you know you have
some good genetics and
you put the dedication in you're going
to have good outcomes
um i didn't achieve you know olympic
success or do any of this stuff so
i don't want to take the credit for any
of this but it was fun i i genuinely
enjoy sports and i think
i sort of have taken some of the
principles from sports and applied it to
my medical training and
even the way that i treat patients
whether they're one year old or 101 year
old
i try and treat them like athletes you
know like even parkinson's patients
we now treat like athletes we create a
rehab program
as if they're rehabbing from a you know
an acl injury
in order for them to be uh moving better
swallowing better working with a
speech language pathologist for their
swallowing working with a physical
therapist to improve their gait
and i really believe in the sports
philosophy i think there's a lot of
great takeaways from it
as well as some negatives you know like
sports psychology is a really
interesting field of research that i'm
uh
constantly looking at connections to the
mind body from sports is always
something i'm really interested in
and that sort of interest and constantly
moving i think translates well to the
medical field
interesting and and can you tell me a
little bit it sounds like you went to a
combined
uh seven year undergrad
med school program how did you decide to
do that
yeah so i knew i wanted to become a
physician
when i was in high school i witnessed uh
you know as
kind of popular as it sounds my father
going through the whole journey
and seeing that i really enjoyed it that
it was a respectful field
i was good at science i liked learning
about the human body like i said i was
somewhat athletic so
that was part of the journey and i said
what's the quickest way i can do it
because i was always in a rush like
i never had any patience for anything
and because my father went to that
program he was aware
that there was this seven-year program
that existed sorry he went to that
medical school
and um i applied and i luckily got
in and instead of going the undergrad
route i was accepted into this very
competitive program where there were
about
let's say 88 acceptance uh people's
88 individuals accepted to the program
and then upon completion of medical
school for the seven years like 13
14 individuals finished so you had to
maintain a very strict gpa in undergrad
you have to get an mcat score to
continue
into the medical school portion and also
life gets in the way i mean in seven
years things change
for people you know when you're 16 17 18
years old you're making a decision what
you want to do
for your rest of your life people change
and grow
yeah so i it's interesting because you
say that you you knew you wanted to be a
physician in high school can you help me
are these two personal by the way or is
this cool no no absolutely not yeah of
course please
um how did you know you wanted to be a
physician
yeah i mean like i knew as much as a 16
or 17 year old would know anything
like i didn't know but uh i thought
it was a good choice and that it was
something i enjoyed
i thought it was a good choice because
it lined up with my skill set
communicating with patients having an
interest in the human body being able to
focus to actually study on these topics
because my mom being a math professor i
hated math
you know like luckily she tutored me so
much so that i crushed the sat because
of her i almost got a perfect score on
the math portion
but if you told me i had to study math
on my own it would never happen
um so science was just a like a really
happy line that matched up with my uh
skill line
that worked really well for a career and
seeing what the intricacies were like
like a lot of students say they want to
go into medicine
but they have no idea what medicine is i
knew i went with my dad to his residency
when he when there was a bring your
child to work day i saw what his on-call
rooms were like i saw
what looked like when he was studying
with his power points
his textbooks so like i kind of got an
inside look at the journey
and i got the good with the bad he never
forced me to become a doctor in fact he
said you sure you want to do this
probably not ideal
our health care system is broken i'm
doing this because i'm old and there's
nothing else to do you can do anything
but uh he he always spoke very highly
about his connection with his patients
and how it's never a dull day and the
career sold itself for me
wow so
med school then how did you decide on
family medicine or what
yeah yeah so i initially wanted to
pursue the field of surgery going into
medical school
and i during my first two years that
still held true
during my third year surgical rotation
it was about 12 weeks and i spent that
time in lutheran medical center
a very high trauma area
it was a level one trauma center and i
scrubbed into like 60 surgeries at the
time maybe 70 surgeries
and i was like i want to make a good
impression because this is a
program that accepts some of our medical
school applicants so maybe i want to go
here
and the more and more i did it i
realized it's not where my skill set was
it wasn't where i found myself to be
most happy while i enjoyed the technical
prowess of becoming a surgeon
i disliked the fact that i didn't get
continuity with the patients that i
didn't get to communicate much with them
because the reality is they're asleep
for the majority of the time so um
i spent a lot of time doing family
medicine as well because that's part of
your required
rotations and then i found myself just
addicted to the field that i constantly
wanted to do it more and more
my fourth year i had like five different
family medicine rotations as my
electives
i was also really passionate about
sports medicine i
considered making that as part of my
fellowship training after residency
and i started even during my residency
my first year covering sporting events
high school college football games um
and i i was really passionate about that
as well especially being an osteopathic
physician
and you know i just kept exploring more
and more family medicine was the field
for me
fascinating yeah i think the the most
important lesson i took away from
my surgery rotation was that if you
round super early in the morning no one
wants to talk to you
and it's something that i actually
sometimes would use when i'd be
like moonlighting so i'd cover like you
know weekends at hospitals and stuff
and you know shift starts at 6 30. so a
lot of times we're like oh you know like
you can start rounding around eight or
nine
you know the patients will be awake then
i was like uh i'm gonna round it like
seven well speaking of mind and body
isn't that like messed up that we do
that to patients who are healing in the
hospital
we don't let them sleep and then we
round on them at 5am and they're
like not getting better because they're
not resting we're we're pretty evil in
hospitals and oh that's the worst food
ever
i i think i think hospital care is
important and i think that's part of the
reason why
you know people get so much better after
they leave is because
you know um and speaking of you know
giving people healthy food this is a
if i can share a story one of my
favorite stories from residency is on
the inpatient psychiatry unit
um uh at mass general hospital they were
doing like you know they're trying to be
healthy right so like they're they're
like their
food has gotten a lot healthier over
time and it's actually like the
cafeteria is like pretty good
okay um so relatively healthy like
relatively tasty
and so we had this one person that was
hospitalized
who had a lot of behavioral problems we
had to keep on calling security you know
inpatient psychiatry um i'm sure you
remember a little bit about how it can
be sometimes
and and so one of my colleagues was just
absolutely brilliant
and and she was just incredibly
compassionate this
patient is just really combative um
and and so she sort of asked him like
you know like what like
is there anything we can do like what do
you hate about being here you hate being
here we can't let you leave i'm so sorry
about that is there anything that i can
do
and so somehow i think she like figured
out that he wanted like chicken fingers
so what she did is get him a pediatric
menu
right because like the adult menus have
like salads and like you know like
you know wheat bread with like lean
protein kind of sandwiches
so she got him a pediatric menu and like
the
the behavioral disturbances just tanked
he was just like as long as he got his
chicken fingers and pizza and stuff like
that and then the funny thing is like
the rest of the unit like started to
revolt
because they're like why does he get
chicken figures and i just get
salad and so then we had this like like
unit why they're like i want my chicken
fingers like where's my attendees at you
know
and so it was it was a real problem our
our unit like you know the person who
ran the unit was like really frustrated
with the situation because
he's actually someone who's very into
like diet and you know all about like
mind body kind of stuff and like we have
to
you know we have to you know offer
patients like healthy
foods and so some people you know we
just sort of
i think some people ended up you know it
was like 10 days on the unit for a week
and then people started to get
discharged and then
sort of evened itself out but yeah yeah
well that's like a form of risk
reduction right so like
you know eating chicken fingers isn't
great but if it's going to prevent
patients from harming themselves or
harming others maybe chicken fingers
aren't so bad
absolutely right i think that's that was
ultimately the approach is that it's way
better than
injecting them with medication that they
don't want like just give them some you
know give them some tenders
um i love that you call them attendees
that's awesome
yeah that you know attendees
i don't know if you you're how familiar
you are with 4chan familiar with 4chan
uh i've heard of it that's like a
reddit-esque forum right
i don't know people are going to be
insulted or flattered by that comparison
i don't know so fortunately yeah yeah so
4chan is um
it's a message board that's entirely
anonymous
so there are no accounts and or maybe
i don't know if there are accounts or
not but like since it's all anonymous it
tends to
um get a lot of flack for actually
there's a lot of like weird and
relatively toxic stuff there because
and so a lot of like memes and and
things like that come out of 4chan and
one of the big things that
that came out of 4chan is actually
attendees and i don't know if you were
following any of this gamestop
kind of stuff yep we're actually doing
uh
um we're actually in the process of
doing a research paper
on um prevalence of different mental
health conditions on 4chan um and i
wonder have you ever heard of something
called arfid i know it's like a
relatively new diagnosis it's like a
wait are fit you said arfid yeah it's
like a
restrictive it's a restrictive feeding
disorder it's like a new kind of eating
disorder
so kind of on the frontier is relatively
new diagnosis but the interesting thing
is that
um people who have arfid who basically
can't eat certain foods because they
can't tolerate like the texture
um so sometimes kids will be like you
know picky eaters and some people grow
out of it but especially some people on
the autism spectrum
seem to have like a lot of um arfid-like
qualities
the one thing is every single patient
i've had with arfid
loves tendees it's like the one thing
that they can eat
so like it does like you know it's not
it seems to be like that attendees are
what
people eat also every patient that i've
had with autism actually i don't know
about
every patient actually yeah that i can
fairly say likes attendees too
and and so we're really curious about
whether there's actually like a
a correlation between the prevalence of
arfid and and whether you
hang out on 4chan so we're we're
studying and those are the kinds of
studies that unfortunately the nih isn't
funding
you know well it's unclear whether
you know it it serves humanity to know
whether the prevalence of rfid is
greater on 4chan or not
i don't really know but it's a research
question that we're fascinated in so
we're going to try to study it
i love it okay and that should be a fun
study to get results from i'm sure
you're going to get a meme out of it
yeah so i think it's going to be all
memes like it means
is one of the major outcomes of the
study there's going to be like
prevalence of arfid and production of
memes are going to be the two outcomes
that we look at
but anyway yeah i don't know where i was
going with that
um i learned something i didn't know
about our fit and now i know that
attendees are the go-to
for patients that are yep potentially
struggling with texture
and yeah so f you know as an fm doc like
i don't know you know how pediatric your
your population is but for picky eaters
like some of them may have actually
arfid fed
so just kind of going back to so it
sounds like you you did a seven-year
combined program
and then um went into family medicine
and can you tell me a little bit about
like social media and how that
started for you because as i understand
you're huge
um it it happened in a weird way
during medical school i had an instagram
profile
and i never had social media prior to
instagram but then when i was
studying for my boards actually i was
studying alongside my friend who was in
nursing school
studying for his nclex and he was taking
pictures outside of the small library
window of clouds
and i'm like what are you doing like
stop distracting me like you're taking
pictures i hear the flash
i hear the clicking sound and he's like
no dude there's this new app it's called
instagram where if you take a picture of
the sunset and you do hashtag sunset
uh you'll get a bunch of likes and all
these people come visit your profile and
i was like that sounds silly like you're
just bored
so later that day i come home i'm like
oh it's kind of a cool app let me try
and i posted a picture of my siberian
husky at the time and
they got all these likes and one of the
likes stood out to me was from a
professional
like i think alpine skier that i watched
in the olympics
the prior olympics and i said wow look
how cool this is this app can bring
people together
let me like use this as sort of my blog
if you will
day-to-day activities put pictures on it
there was no stories at the time so
just kind of like posting on there and
without any real
goals but with the potential that it
could somewhat help my medical career in
the future whether it was for marketing
connections et cetera et cetera and i
did the entrepreneurial mindset
exactly that i just thought like
connecting with people by the
thousands is going to be beneficial in
one way or another and
it also didn't hurt growing up i didn't
get a lot of compliments or like female
attention
and now on social media i was probably
in the best shape that i was at the time
i was posting on social media i was
really into bodybuilding
i was getting a lot of compliments there
for that i'm sure that played a role
in continuing to to do that um
and uh i was doing that for a while yep
so sorry what role do you think that
played
um positive dopamine hits continue to
come back
um there was definitely a point in time
where it
affected me in a way where i became like
arrogant with the fact that i had
you know 5 000 followers or something
and my friends
uh they are quick to humble me and
they pointed out that i was becoming
that person and i had to do some
introspection i actually deleted the app
for a while
not like my profile off the app but the
app off my phone
and really questioned why i was doing it
was there something unhealthy behind it
and i definitely saw that i was
talking way too much about it all the
time and it became something that like
i didn't like about myself that i was
becoming so i said okay i need to like
tone down the amount of
time i'm talking about social media
realize that my value is not tied to the
self-worth of how many followers i have
that if people like me it's because they
like me not because of the followers
and i learned that lesson fairly early
on yeah
bro you're fast forwarding past all the
good parts so like here's what i'm
hearing like
if it like like just think about this
for a second okay because like people
getting wrapped up in social media
people becoming arrogant
as you said people becoming that person
there are a lot of those people out
there
and if there's one thing that i think
actually could be very educational for
people it's like
not everyone is able to do that right
like
in fact it's i i'd love to ask you a few
more questions but if you know if you
yeah no no that's fair game um i think
my sort of skill like i'm always kind of
making fun of the fact that i'm not the
smartest person in the world and that
i wasn't the top student in my class but
i think where my skill lies in being
introspective and constantly
reevaluating my actions and my thoughts
so
if you'd like to ask about that well
yeah so so who would who did you become
when you say you became that person what
started to happen what does that person
look like
yeah um it would basically be
every conversation that i had
was about the social media and my value
ranking system of the people in my life
became about who had followers
yeah i don't know if you're familiar
with black mirror or the tv show on
netflix
yeah there was one episode where they
kind of like rated each other a ranking
system
yeah and like no joke it was
eerily similar to what was becoming sort
of in my mind to a degree where like
if someone would talk to me i would feel
perhaps above them because i had a
certain following and keep in mind i'm
19 years old at the time so like
i i'm still a student like i have no
money i'm broke and this is the only
thing where i had some value that i was
like oh my god
i'm cool because of this and i realized
i was tying all my self-worth to it and
everyone else's self-worth to it
because it was simple in that the
dopamine hits came when likes came
that you could easily quantify like
people based on their numbers
but that's not reality because people
aren't just numbers so it was a
false system but it was an easy system
and yeah i just talked way too much
about it and i showed off way too much
about
how many likes my posts got or how many
followers i had
and i didn't like who i was becoming i
didn't like that i was doing that so
often and
i learned that lesson early on but
that's not to say that
i didn't relearn that lesson over and
over and over again
like even over the last year um
not so much that i was becoming arrogant
but over the last year
i found myself again tying my happiness
levels or my fulfillment levels
to numbers on social media and that's
something i talk about not doing all the
time
and yet i did it so often even this last
year
so it's a constant process of learning
and
can you tying things back to things that
you learned before
that that sounds like really really like
helpful to understand like
because what i'm hearing is that you
know you kind of fell into that trap
once and you kind of worked your way
through it
you know and then but at the same time
you can still fall into the trap again
yeah for sure and it might be a slightly
different trap like it might be the
numbers again but
not so much with arrogance the next time
but with happiness
or success or fulfillment what have you
so
the trap is always there can you help me
understand that and
you mentioned like over the last year
like what
yeah so i have a cool probably one
an example that you'll really relate to
well uh
being in the field of psychiatry um the
the treadmill of hedonism where we
constantly are on this treadmill chasing
extrinsic levels of happiness um so
whether it's money fame what have you
uh is something i try and stay away from
as much as possible i try and get
fulfillment from my deep personal
relationships from the volunteer work
that i do my patients etc however
youtube specifically youtube
is savagely
pushing the treadmill onto you and
doesn't let you leave the treadmill
because youtube is this unique algorithm
that essentially is this evil personal
trainer
that doesn't let you get off the tread
bill
because when you create a piece of
content that does well
it doesn't allow you to celebrate that
success because the next video
has to either equate or even supersede
the success of the next one
otherwise the algorithm will just stop
recommending it
and the feedback mechanism of what makes
you happy falls off very quickly
so while in other platforms like if you
did well
you continue doing well youtube you're
either growing or you're shrinking
there's no like in between
and because of that you find yourself on
this treadmill all the time
chasing success and you never really get
to take a proper break
unless you have a great understanding of
how all of this works psychologically
and knowing yourself so
i like to make the comparison between
traditional television and youtube in
this way
and i'm borrowing part of this concept
from a good friend of mine
who runs this channel called infographic
show he talks about
deserved views versus earned views
and when we talk about like game of
thrones if season one is a hit
everyone will tune in to season two
because it deserved those views
youtube is savage in that you could have
a great
10 videos but if your 11th video
gets a lower watch time or has a lower
click-through rate youtube doesn't care
that you crushed it on the last 10
videos
your views will just get destroyed in
the algorithm which is great for the
viewer because the viewer is only
getting the top tier content
but as a creator you're constantly under
the gun
because all of your views have to be
earned none of them are deserved
so good in the concept that the viewer
gets the best content
good and that it's created a level
playing field that it doesn't matter if
you have one subscriber or a million
subscribers
any piece of content can get recommended
and get get viral success
bad for the creator in terms of burnout
bad for the creator that you
never really get a chance to disconnect
or celebrate your successes
unless you are really really organized
and psychologically well understood
individual
can you that's blew my mind first of all
thank you so much for sharing that and
i'm i'm so curious like what what
so what does that do to you right so you
talked about youtube
you talked about how you basically like
can't ever stop growing
otherwise you'll fall off and what does
that do
to you how does that how does that
affect
fulfillment success things like that
well i've been doing youtube for
probably just over four years now
and never missing a posting date
you want to continue that your growth
was really good you want to continue
that
inadvertently you end up tying your
self-worth to your subscriber count or
your view count
or your growth count and as a result
if that for whatever reason pauses fades
decreases it ultimately starts affecting
your mental health
and unless you are in a very healthy
healthy psychological mindset
like i'm talking about where you can be
in that buddhist state where you're like
everything is transient even if
something bad happens it won't be long
and if anything good happens it won't be
for that long so i'll be happy here sad
here
and i'm so balanced you're going to
suffer as a result
and for me despite how balanced i come
off or happy i come off in my posts and
all of that
this last year was absolutely a struggle
you know pandemic has affected everybody
to a degree
but watching sometimes content drop off
or going through some difficult times in
life
watching the youtube channel suffer
affected me way more than it should have
and as a result i had to function in
much the same way i did when i was 18 19
years old
when i was becoming arrogant and tying
my self-worth to it back then
and how how what how did that you kind
of say you
talk about it like it's inevitable what
like what was your experience
of so i'm i'm i'm just inferring here
that
over the last year your youtube channel
growth slowed down
yeah well not only did it slow down but
also you know
burnout is real like uh like i said
you don't get deserved views you get
earned views
and when you know you do that without
taking any breaks
and that's essentially what i've been
doing for four years
saying like i will outlast i will
persevere going through i can't you know
my dad's advice
um i i've been pushing really hard in
addition to residency because
all of this started towards the middle
of my residency and i made sure to make
that a priority
so never took a day off residency um to
do anything social media related
so while finishing that also doing this
at the same time it just it was such a
long process that it caught up with me
in that
i was like really getting
burned out like the classical symptoms
of burnout where you derive less joy
from the things that once brought you
joy
sleep was messed up anxiety was high
where i actually had to seek therapy
throughout the pandemic
and i learned a lot you know i learned a
lot going through them because it's
something i advocate for my patients
and now it was the time that i realized
i do need help and i need to figure out
what was going on
and i think this was a cool takeaway
that i learned from therapy
which is uh you're very familiar with
cbt
cognitive behavioral therapy you know
attacking your irrational thoughts
putting in a more rational thought to at
least decrease
the grasp or the depth of how sad you
feel or how depressed you feel
and i would do that quite well for the
last 10 years or so i would say
or at least well enough to help me
manage but over the last year what i
found was that i was doing the cbt on
myself so often
that i was reliving the negative
experiences over and over again
where like you know if you watch a movie
a scary movie
and like or an action movie your brain
on a functional mri
lights up the same areas of your brain
as if you were experiencing that pain or
that that fear
so i was essentially doing that to my
brain over and over again by trying to
force cbt on myself
and only when speaking to a mental
health professional realized that
i need to actually disconnect from that
and i need to disconnect from social
media
and i need to not constantly be
refreshing
my feeds and that while they're going
through i can't
could be a great coping mechanism and
hiding or disconnecting
like disconnecting viewed as hiding
could be perceived as a negative coping
mechanism if i'm not facing reality
but that wasn't what was happening i was
facing reality but i was doing it so
much so
that it was actually having a negative
effect so the coping mechanism of
hot hiding or disconnecting was actually
a strong positive that i was missing out
on
and that was something i learned that i
wouldn't have learned had i not
uh sought out help yeah that's
thank you so much for sharing that mike
can i just kind of recap what i heard
there
please yeah so so it's interesting
because you know when i when i listen to
you mike when i when i
you know what you give off is like
unrivaled success right
like it's like you know you're it's it's
the immigrant story like
growing up like you know this i mean
you're you're driven
you're focused you're caring um
and you know like national oh yeah like
like
even even the even the humility is so
amazing because you're like yeah like
it's not like i was an olympic athlete i
was just
a national champion you know like nvd
and and and so it's like because you
seem to you know really succeed a lot
man like you know like succeeding from a
young age like
seven year medical programs are not easy
to get into they're
way more competitive than md
schools for sure
i'm pretty sure about that i mean i i
mean i actually don't know the
statistics but
my understanding of the accelerated you
know programs are that
they're hard to get into um
and like like you said because they have
like a high drop-off rate right because
it
ain't easy a lot of people drop out so
they're very selective with who they
take
and then fm residency and then social
media and it's kind of like whether you
like
whether it starts with offering to sell
corn
and making a profit on pairs right
you find a way right you follow through
or you you what did you say you work
through i can't
yeah and and so it's really interesting
to see kind of
what that mentality how it's helped you
a lot and also like
it sounds like you've sort of paid a
price for never letting yourself
say i can't can't take a break
got to keep growing i can do this you
know like
and and even the way you when you were
talking about cbt you said
attack your rational thoughts and i was
like yeah that's
that's going to be a problem i mean i
think if we're talking about
you know balance in the mind and the
buddha state that you're talking about
attacking your mind is
not how you get there you can absolutely
succeed
it's how you can get success and this is
what i've seen time and time again it's
that you know when people
you know really like
don't let themselves fail it's it's a
very brutal way of
of living it's a very successful way of
living but it's
it's brutal on the self um you know it's
hard because yeah i don't think you're
quite
listening to other parts of your body
listening to other parts of your mind
because you're not going to be a quitter
you know that's not that's not who you
are
um and so it was really fascinating to
hear i i think i i
feel like i learned a lot and thank you
so much for sharing that
yeah i think any coping mechanism
if it's successful in the beginning uh
if you overuse it
it's ultimately going to have drawbacks
so you know this isn't a problem unique
to me or unique to people who've had
success
i think every human goes through
something like this just in different
ways in different situations
just for me i've always been like this
energized kind of person
people call me energizer bunny growing
up my friend uh
here in new york he's like you're like a
cockroach they can't kill you you just
keep going like you never get tired i
would work a 36 hour shift and i would
go play basketball with
my agent here in new york so like yeah
like i've always viewed that as a batch
of honor or something that identified
myself as
but at the same time i need to be aware
of the pitfalls
of always being on or of always being
super friendly and accessible even like
right now
so if i go outside in new york and let's
say i want to take my headphones and
listen to an audio book and chill out on
the grass on the west side highway
with my dog without a doubt now it's
come to the point that someone will come
up
and maybe ask for a picture which isn't
a big problem but
we'll want to get into a conversation
and i want to talk to people i want to
meet people
but sometimes you just kind of want to
be by yourself and vibe out on a book
and now i'm learning the reality of it
not that
it's not a show-off thing people want to
come up and get to know you and talk to
you and they get excited and i would
have gotten excited if i was 18 and i
was meeting someone i was following
so i understand it but now understanding
that i can't
always be available and i can't always
be super friendly or
just say yes to everybody that is a
completely foreign experience to me
because i hate saying no i don't like
saying no
but for my own mental health i have to
sometimes now set some boundaries which
i've never set in my life before
well yeah sounds like it's a lesson you
had to learn the hard way
it's not a hard way because there's way
harder lessons learned uh
in life for my patients from my friends
that i've seen
uh you know struggle with serious
serious problems and it's not to
downplay
the seriousness of my problem it's just
that's exactly what you're doing it's
it's just
there's things that are cause real
suffering and
there's problems like each problem has a
scale
and i would say this is a true problem
and it's truly affecting me
um but on levels of severity and how bad
things could get
i know maybe this is my own coping
mechanism at play
and that's exactly what it is yeah well
done with the introspection there
right because it's interesting how you
invalidate your suffering i think that's
what got you to four years of burnout
because i think that's actually mike
like i'm sorry if this is
going off the rails in terms of what
you're okay with but like that's how you
get
burnt out right because you're there's a
signal in your mind
and you've learned how to say like
actually i am okay having boundaries but
why did it take you four years
it's because when you say like even now
when you say to me like oh my god i
sound like such an
right like that's how it feels to be
like because you want to be a nice
person
you don't want to be that arrogant prick
who's big on social media and doesn't
have the time of day
like you recognize because you're a
physician that every human is a human
doesn't matter how many like
followers you've got on social media
like you've got one heart you can get an
mi i can get an m i we can both get
strokes we can all get cancer
you know i think medicine is great in
terms of teaching you that all humans
are equal
and bizarrely i think that's what's
actually trapping you
right because not all humans i mean when
i i just took a walk before we streamed
today and i walked around for 15 minutes
i've been recognized a total of four
times on the street
you know and so that it's still fun at
that frequency it's like four times over
two years is great
makes you feel good but i still get to
take walks
you know it's like it's something that
most human beings get to do
and i'd be really careful with yourself
because you know
sure the suffering that other people go
through is greater but like be careful
there
because i think that's makes you a good
physician
it's also going to burn you the out
when it comes to social media
no you're absolutely fundamentally in
every way right
um it's the reason why it's confusing
is it's unnatural this type of
notoriety is not a natural human thing
and it's not something even
like i guess like you could look to
celebrities in
traditional formats actors singers etc
but like really from medical
professionals or regular people
there's not a lot of people i can go to
for advice especially in the beginning
when i was starting all the social media
things so
i'm kind of trailblazing in a weird way
so that's why i'm always you know
there's people who are growing in the
medical space
i keep my dms open to them again
sometimes at my own peril
where at midnight where i should be
sleeping i'm having an hour conversation
helping a fellow medical influencer
navigate how to not get taken advantage
by a brand
so like i want to do that as much as
possible so i'm trying to figure out how
to manage all that
but it's a journey and i'm going to make
mistakes and you know as long as i learn
i feel like that's okay
and by the way the comparison thing
isn't also just looking at
uh what other people are going through
it's also things that i've gone through
in life and
you know well i don't want to get too
much into childhood stuff but like
during medical school
i did lose my mom to medical uh to
cancer
and that was a very tough thing to not
again
it was tough for me for sure but the
toughest part for me was watching how it
affected my father
who did this whole process who
you know sacrificed so much of his life
and was finally getting on his feet as a
doctor
him and my mom had all these plans
watching that break down
that hurt and you know leaving long
island where i was living on campus at
the time and moving back in with my dad
that presented all sorts of challenges
and i saw how difficult that was
so when i look through what i'm dealing
through now dealing with now
there definitely is a layer of like an
understanding of this is less serious
than that
so it's not that i'm just saying oh
people have it harder so my broken bones
shouldn't count
it's i've experienced 10 broken bones
and this one broken bone is probably not
as bad
yeah so what i'm hearing there is that
there's a healthy amount of
perspective as opposed to invalidation
yeah right like i don't want to say
healthy
why wouldn't you say healthy well no it
is a healthy mechanism but i wouldn't
say that this is perfect all the time
like i don't
again i don't want to give myself so
much credit that i'm like oh all the
time i'm able to
make this healthy comparison between my
past struggles and my current struggles
i absolutely look at other people and
see
that they're struggling more than me and
i invalidate my own experiences i do
that that's for sure
i was just really confused why can't
like bro like why can't you give
yourself credit for growing
no no i i take the credit i just don't
want it to come off like i know
everything because it's not true
why okay i'll explain why it's important
um i think it's important because i want
people to see
that while i'm doing this job that you
labeled healthy and i appreciate that
it's not always healthy i'm a lot of
times am invalidating my feelings
so while i do have this sense of healthy
perspective and all that
i also make a lot of these mistakes of
comparing myself and invalidating my
feelings
so people can understand that if they do
that too they're not failures this is
what everyone does including myself
can i just think for a second yeah sure
you're probably like this guy is crazy
no on the contrary
i think um you know so here's here's
what i'm
i'm seeing mike you're not crazy you're
at the top of the bell curve and the
problem here is that
which i think which and apologies
because i kind of think of you as a
colleague but what i'm going to say now
may come across
as like i know better than you but um
you know i think
we each have our respective areas of of
specialty
so i think you got to be careful because
like
i don't know what how do i say this
there's just something about how hard
you try to consider
other people right so like you think so
much about how what you're saying is
being perceived which
may be like related to social media but
i don't think i think that would be a
little bit unfair i think it's just
like you you want people to understand
that it's okay to fail you want people
to understand that like you struggle too
and that's not you could you could say
that there's a piece of that that's like
oh like
image conscious right like in and you
don't want to come across as arrogant
there may be a piece of that but i'm
getting a lot of genuine like
you care about sending the right
messages to people
and not propagating actually like a lot
of the
messages that social media seems to
project which is that there are
the chads right the taekwondo champions
soccer captains seven year medical
school program
people on youtubers like you're all of
those things and then they're like
the normal people over here and so i i
think it's it's very clear to me that
you're trying to
share that you're not actually any
different right that it's the
introspection it's the work it's the
effort and that's what you really want
people to come away with
get that but there's a subtle thing
there which is like you're caring so
much about other people like what about
you
yeah that's the the way that i would
first of all 100 accurate so very well
done reading me and
clearly you're a specialist and a
professional in this space
no surprise there um for me i sum it up
in this
i become very good at being comfortable
with being uncomfortable
i'm at being comfortable with being
comfortable
so part of that from
all of that is essentially how you
explained it so
yes there's a layer of i don't want to
come off arrogant and there's like a
brand
image conscious thing that i'm doing but
also it's because i
my ultimate mission and why i'm doing
social media and where i derive my
intrinsic value
is by putting out the accurate message
and especially to help people
who are truly suffering with things that
are confused and want good information
so
yeah hmm
are you happy mike yeah
i'm fulfilled oh man there's such a did
you see that show i'm such a tv geek and
movie geek
i relate everything back to shows i
don't know if i've watched too much tv
in my life but
there's a show called magic city um tell
me about it
the worst show that i'm like using as an
example for such a high-level
conversation about mental health but
it's a show about gangsters uh starting
up
gambling from cuba in florida and
they're trying to get it passed and all
that
but they asked one of the mobsters like
are you happy
and he says howdy duties happy i'm
content
and i don't know why that line stuck
with me but instead of content i think
i'm fulfilled
what is this so help me understand what
fulfillment is
uh fulfillment is i like to think of it
in a situation
so if today is my last day on earth do i
feel like i've accomplished everything i
could have until this point and am i am
i satisfied
and the answer is yes and i feel like if
i could be in that mental state
as much as i can in my life i'm happy
like that that's how i
sort of grade it so fulfillment is about
accomplishment before you die
satisfaction with what you have
accomplished and when i say accomplished
i really mean it in a holistic way in an
osteopathic way if you will
good relationships with my family good
relationships with my friends
being an ethical and moral person
helping the world while having success
on my own right
that's how i think of accomplishments as
opposed to you know seven million
followers or whatever it is
can i think for a second how we doing on
time by the way i don't know so we
usually run for about two hours at a
stretch i think that's like the
bandwidth that i have but
and we're coming up on an hour and a
half um
i'm good i'm used to uh long
interactions with my patients so
um
so fulfillment is happiness
yeah i mean like it's are we looking for
uh an oxford definition of happiness
and the funny thing is i love the field
of positive psychology so
uh martin seligman um i'm gonna butcher
his name
me highly checker the the author of the
book flow i think
kick set me highly i think is how you
pronounce it but
not even gonna try because it's so bad
on my part if i ever
end up i probably bless you i apologize
so
i've i've read a lot of these authors
and i've tried to figure out what
happiness means and i don't know like
you know martin selig's whole thing is
flourish instead of happiness he changed
the term
in his books for me i think
happiness is fulfillment i think
happiness is also probably more accurate
as a state of mind in a single moment
as opposed to like is your life
happiness
like i don't think you can say that i
think happiness is like how you feel in
this given moment one to ten bull
and right now i can be happy because
we're having a very fulfilling
conversation
but if i stub my toe in 10 minutes and
you ask me then i'm not going to be so
happy
so i think happiness is like a point of
time reference where fulfillment is
sort of a more grand scheme adjective
or now yeah so i i'm not i'm not so sure
i agree with you there
i love it please share with me why so
here's here's what i'm hearing okay
what i'm hearing is that you're not sure
what happiness is so
your mind has figured out in an almost
like a rational way like you've asked
like not
i don't want to make it sound
intellectual i think it's a little bit
more philosophical or spiritual in
nature
you're like what is the nature of
happiness and when you kind of looked at
like here's what i'm imagining okay like
you kind of looked at your life and you
were like
you know because i think even the way
that you define fulfillment
comes with the construction of if i died
today
would i have regrets could i be proud of
what i've accomplished
right could i be proud of the life that
i've built
like i'm on this earth i've been given
certain challenges i've been give
given certain privileges did i do a good
job and if the answer to that question
is yes
then you feel fulfilled is that fair
yes with just the small stipulation that
yes
is not a binary answer it's kind of like
a percentage if you will of how much yes
yeah absolutely right so like there are
these certain things that you can say
like
you know did mike like do a good job did
he leave the world a better place
and like you know then he left it and i
totally get that but i think it's
it's a it's a little bit of a
philosophical answer
and then it's interesting because then
on the flip side you also talk about an
experiential answer
right which is that in a particular
moment i can have
a particular state of mind my
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous
system or like in a right kind of
balance
you know i'm in a state of eustress like
in kind of a flow straight state where
it's not
boring but it's also not overly
stressful and
i can feel like a temporary moment of
happiness
but that that happiness is transient by
nature
so when you talk about the buddha when
you did this thing over here right
so like when you talk about that it
sounds to me like
that's really the one thing that you
sort of don't
quite haven't grasped fully yet like
you're aware that it's possible
you know that people kind of do it i'm
not saying that you haven't grown and
you haven't
learned how to carve out balance in your
life
but it feels like like mike everything
you do is so damn effortful
you work so hard at it it's funny you're
saying the exact
opposite of what like the attendings who
have trained me say
they say mike always takes the path of
least resistance he works smarter not
harder
it's like the exact opposite of the
feedback i've been giving my whole life
so it's interesting that you say that
yeah so that means on the one hand maybe
i'm completely wrong
right because if it's if it's completely
contrary there's there's truth to both
sides as always
and and no no well maybe i'm just wrong
right i just could be talking about you
because you're not wrong you're not
wrong in the sense of like
but i sometimes feel that on an unfair
characterization of my work when
like i remember my ex-girlfriend's
father said something like oh mike's
really smart like
he figured out a way to not work so many
hours in the hospital
great i'm like are you insane like do
you know how many hours i work on social
media and how stressful this is and all
this
yeah sometimes i do feel like it's an
unfair characterization
but at other times i agree with it i
mean so here's like even when it comes
to
happiness like you talk about being
introspective you've worked at happiness
well it's not like it's not like work
sounds tedious
i enjoyed what i was doing i forgot how
effortful
effortful you exerted effort right
that's like i'm noticing that you
thought about it
you know i'm not saying it's bad like
i'm not saying it's not enjoyable but
like there was energy expended let's put
it that way
agreed and and so i think that there's
actually something
in between those two states so on the
one hand there's like
the construction of can i be proud of my
life
and then on the other hand there's the
variant emotion of like transients
maybe it's not quite emotion i think
it's a little bit more than that but i
think that if you if you really pay
attention to buddhism and what that
sort of being content is like when you
talk about
being psychologically like let's say
grounded to the point or
yeah like you know tethered enough to
where the fluctuations of social media
which from a dopamine perspective
neuroscience perspective they're going
to knock you off track right it's the
equivalent of sailing in stormy seas
for your ego and your sense of like
happiness like that's just what it is
that's what social media does
that's why it's so successful because
they figured out how to like flip all
these switches in our brain
that you know make us creating content
and never quitting and giving a
wonderful experience to the user at the
sacrifice to ourself
and so i think finding that place of
buddha is actually there's something in
between which is actually a space of
detachment
where it's sort of like i know it sounds
kind of weird but like you know
acknowledging realism nope
not nihilism detachment and so this is
where
you know and i think it kind of comes
back to like when and i i think you will
probably understand this actually
so when you make some youtube content i
think there are a lot of different
drivers in your mind one is like the
entrepreneurial like how do i make
successful content
and then there are times though that i
think that you probably put out a piece
of con
or you've got conflicting things okay so
there's a tension between
what would be successful and like what
feels spiritually
or holistically like the right kind of
content there's some balance between
that
and and so i think if you think about
the spiritually
the when you lean towards the holistic
content
what you actually have to do is like
detach
from the consequences of what's gonna
happen with the content
when you make a piece of content you're
like this may not do very well but i'm
just gonna let that go
if it doesn't do so well it's actually
not that big of a deal
like i acknowledge it's gonna do well
i'm not gonna get bent out of shape that
it's not gonna
that it's gonna do well but i'm gonna do
this because it's like
aligned with my values and it's like
what i want to do does that make sense
absolutely and if i could just
like from here not to ruin your train of
thought really quickly
throw in here i think about that
a lot and i think about from a practical
perspective
what it would mean if i would switch and
just go
to making the content that pleases the
soul if you will
and i also think about how on a
practical sense what it means to survive
what it means to you know be financially
well off to be able to help others
and do all these things and i think
about the value that comes from perhaps
making
uh like a memes video that may be on
memes 28
i'm not so excited to do memes 29 but i
know that it'll bring in a ton of
viewers that will watch the meaningful
content that will then enrich their
lives
so i think all these things are kind of
i think content creators struggle with
this a lot
but here's the interesting thing if you
made content for the soul i think you'd
be unhappy
interesting okay so because here's the
important thing
it's not choosing content for the soul
or choosing content for success it is
the detachment from the decision that is
the source of happiness
i don't know if that makes sense but
like when you make content for the soul
it's not making content for the soul
that is actually the source of happiness
it's the internal process
that you go through to let go of the
successful content that is the source of
happiness
is that true does that like is it
possible
like i agree that that could be the case
could it also be the case
that there is a source of happiness that
it's you enjoy doing that for the soul
not just deciding not to do the other
thing
uh i know this is gonna sound weird
right it's gonna sound really weird what
i'm about to say
no so this is where and then this is
where we have to be really careful right
because i'm talking about
happiness as if it's true so what i'm
going to say like so let me qualify
that's
that statement okay so i think this is
the problem is because people like
do what they love right like and they
think that that's the source of
happiness that's not that's not how it
works
i think bizarrely happiness is actually
a relatively simple thing that
i think would like there's a reason we
kind of quote him right
because i think he figured it out and
the reason that
a religion cropped up around him is
because he actually like
actually figured it out in sort of a
scientific way
that what is the nature of happiness and
the nature of happiness is actually
detachment
and and you know if you kind of think a
little bit about why was it so hard for
your dad when your mom passed away
it's because he was so attached to all
of the things that they were going to do
right like and so it's kind of
interesting but if you think about you
know
i know it sounds kind of weird but like
the more you get tangled up with
something and i think you probably
understand this too because
it sounds like you've gone through the
process of disentangling yourself
from your social media identity like
over and over again
and so if we really think about it each
of those times if you look for a common
thread
i think what you're gonna see is that
you got caught up in it right like who
mike was mike wasn't over here
mike got taken over by dr mike and the
more that you get entangled with dr mike
you can be successful actually in both
situations but one of them is going to
come with suffering and one of them is
going to come without suffering
does that make sense yes
my pushback or question would be
first of all i would say i would venture
to say that there's probably not one
right way to live life like there's like
who is the ultimate judge of what
happiness is if someone finds happiness
in
not following a buddhist mentality they
could be doing the right thing for them
right so like i try not to judge other
people's definition of happiness
um when it comes to
attaching yourself to something and then
feeling tremendous sense of loss
like you mentioned with my father i
this is not based on any on any evidence
but perhaps
there is a layer of beauty in that that
is happiness
that is not defined by neurotransmitters
or
numbers on a happiness rating scale yeah
absolutely this is why detachment is
separate from the axis of emotion
right so like appreciating like you're
100 right and i think it's sort of like
is not actually i don't take that as
pushback
i think that point is actually exactly
what i'm trying to say
it's the distance from the thing the
loss you can feel sadness
and you can still find contentment and
happiness in sadness which is weird
so this is the axis that buddha was
talking about which is sort of like if
we think about watching sad movies right
so your
movie buff so if we think about the
experience of movies like have you seen
parasite
yes okay so like no spoilers but like
parasite is an emotional roller coaster
and the emotions that you feel are
largely negative
like they're not in the positive valence
you know it's not you know a story of
you know puppies and siberian huskies
and things like that it's like
it's emotionally brutal and yet
why do we enjoy it because the axis of
positive and negative emotion is is
separated
once we have that detachment to a
certain degree right right like
but yeah go you wanted to say something
about why it was no it's going to answer
your question of
like to me why we feel sadness watching
parasite
is the same reason we feel happy sorry
the reason we feel happiness after
watching parasite despite it being a sad
movie
is the same reason we feel happiness
after eating an incredibly
spicy pepper it's like you had this
potential threat
so the capsaicin attaches to your
receptors
you feel this pain the pain goes away
you realize
there was no damage endorphin rush
combined with surviving
this painful experience brings you
happiness
that's interesting so parasite
your brain functional mri is going off
and experiencing all these negative
things
the movie ends you realize you didn't go
through this horrible situation
and you feel better i also relate this
to
addiction with gambling you lose all of
your money
you've mortgaged your house you've lost
all this stuff
after you lose you realize you're still
alive
and life goes on you get an endorphin
rush and that is why frequently people
are addicted to gambling
and actually addicted to losing because
there's such a rush in losing and yet
still surviving
correct me if i run on that i'm gonna
have to think about that let me
see if you've tumbled down the entire
foundation of how i understand this
stuff
give me a second
i don't think so so here's here's what
i'll say
okay so i think what you've done a
beautiful job of doing is
illustrating the mechanism of like
rebound relief you know so there's an
interesting experiment i can't
think of the reference right off the top
of my head but i know i've got it
sitting on my google drive
so they took they took like you know 100
people
and they had them put their hand in cold
water and like the water was of
different temperatures so like it was
like painfully cold and then like even
more painfully cold
but the experiment that they looked at
was that you know it
if you have the most painful experience
like painfully cold water and they start
to warm it up at the end
and even though they never get to the
warm uh like
they never reach like the the less cold
water
people will rate that second experience
as more favorable than
absolutely being in warmer water so i
think there's
absolutely a principle that you're
tapping into which is like a
neuroscience mechanism
through which the relief of a negative
experience can be like reinforcing in
some way
with you i think that's very good point
from a neuroscience perspective
i still think though that that is a
mechanistic
neuroscientific thing that doesn't quite
translate if anything maybe i gave the
wrong example
but i think what i'm kind of talking
about is actually like a state of
consciousness or a state of mind it's a
perspective
that i think we can all experience that
essentially when we look at like the
the karmic religions they talk about
something called enlightenment
which is a state of persistent happiness
it's actually they don't use the word
happiness they use the word bliss
and so if you think about this
experience that has been described by
people like over and over and over again
there has been something of a scientific
study and this is where you kind of say
i try not to judge
and that's where i kind of say well like
i don't know if i really agree with that
because
as a scientist i do believe
as a scientist a psychiatrist and
studying some neuroscience
i do believe that happiness is while
there is an individual determination and
every person's life is different
i do think as a scientist that if you
study a hundred happy people
a hundred sad people that you will find
common elements that lead to this
experience that human beings have
and i think that like buddhism is
essentially i mean it's a religion
sure but it's essentially like a group
of people who sat down
and like studied the science of
happiness in a personal and individual
way
and it's been my experience that when
when i work with people that teaching
them this
like i don't think that i have had a
single person
who has not arrived at the same
conclusion if they have done the work
do you think that's that selection bias
at play like that they did the work
so we've pre-selected the people that
are going to do the work so these are
the people that are going to get the
benefit
absolutely it do i think it's selection
bias at play
no is it possible it's selection bias
absolutely
right so like this is where i would like
so let's let's you know let's think
about it
you know if i give someone antibiotics
for
let's not use strep throat let's say
pneumonia right
is it selection bias at play that the
like could selection bias
be at play it's studying the efficacy of
our antibiotics for pneumonia
of much lower likelihood because it's
randomized
and right behind it absolutely right so
like like it's much lower likelihood but
you know i would also argue that you
know it's unclear because we haven't
done well actually we sort of
hold on let me think about how to
respond to this
so as an individual practitioner by
definition
i'm going to have a lot more selection
bias than any rct
at the same time i think that you could
argue that a religious tradition has
selection bias to it
but i think it's really tricky because
when you have a sustainable
answer that generations of people have
found have been like successful
it's hard for me to tease apart what
part of that is selection bias
and what part of that is like an
actually correct
treatment it's like you're saying
i was gonna say like if you let's say
you have a cure
for pneumonia like 100 cure but the
compliance rate is only 5
with this treatment is that a successful
treatment
yeah how would you define it yeah so i
would call that a successful treatment
right the problem is in the compliance i
would
as a family medicine doctor i'm with you
and i think that's fair because i think
you have to bake in compliance but this
is where so also as like you know as a
psychiatrist
i i mean i i'm with you i i completely
understand i still remember in my first
pharmacology lecture
they were like any monkey can prescribe
blood pressure medication
it takes a doctor to get a patient to
take it
when they have to wake up twice in the
middle of the night to go pee
that's the job the real doctor's job of
a doctor is compliance
and this is also where like if you think
about as a psychiatrist i get that as a
fm doc but like if you think about
what do i treat what i treat is the
compliance issue
i don't treat them you know like 90 i'm
an addiction psychiatrist
all you know my treatment is focused on
compliance
so if we think about you know meditation
is an effective treatment like is
meditation and effective
treatment to reduce negative symptoms of
schizophrenia
yes is it hard to get people
to meditate is it an effective holistic
intervention
possibly not but if we look at the
actual treatment
does it work yes and i'm with you that
that an intervention and this is where
maybe i'd qualify a little bit
that the interventional intervention
globally may not be effective if it only
has a five percent compliance rate
but is the is is the tree well you know
i'd so i'd separate out those two things
and i'd say that that's where like
90 of the work that i do is getting
people to be compliant
yeah like for me we have such great
evidence behind
you know behavioral therapy uh it
working sometimes as well
uh as anti-depressant medications
usually
rest in tandem obviously when you look
at the evidence
but let's think about it from my
perspective as a family medicine doctor
i have a patient who comes in and is
experiencing depressive symptoms and i
diagnose them with major depressive
disorder
a lot of my patients suffer with low
motivation levels they struggle to
shower to get out of bed
to go to work to take care of their
family to enjoy things that once brought
them pleasure
although what you see on a commercial
for pharma ad
and these patients are suffering i then
give them a referral to see you or a
psychologist and now they have to be
motivated enough to call the number on
the back of their insurance
get five providers one who's no longer
taking new patients one who's no longer
in network one who has a six month
waiting period
and we we then say these individuals
who end up finding this care do well
how do we study the people that have
never even got in
and i don't know maybe they would have
had the same impact as the people who
got in
but to me when i look at the individuals
that i help
a lot of times i'm only helping the
people who actually end up getting the
motivation to go for these treatments
so how do we sort of merge those two
groups
yeah so this is where i think this
conversation is changing a little bit
which i love
so this is where like i'm a big fan of
like meeting people where
they're at so i think the biggest
problem in medicine what you're the
problem you're describing and if we talk
about
if a treatment works a hundred percent
of the time but only five percent of
people
do it i think that's the problem that
needs to be fixed
right so the question is like and this
is the problem with the rct
because like this is this is why like i
know that in western medicine the rct is
the gold standard treatment i think it's
a terrible standard of treatment
i think it's the fact that the rct is
the gold standard
of what we use in medicine creates these
problems
because the whole point behind an rct
which is a randomized controlled trial
is that it removes all of the
like real world or the real world from
the equation well so when you test
versus effectiveness right so so this is
where like in psychiatry we
there's actually a couple of really
great studies that are naturalistic
studies
so what they did is they followed
patients over time
and like put them on certain medications
and they actually
factored in like if this medication has
this side effect
what's the likelihood that the person
will stop taking it
and so i personally i've found the
naturalistic studies to actually be
superior to rcts in this way because it
mirrors a real world thing where we're
following patients
we're giving them something like
clozapine right and then like sure it's
the most effective drug for like
schizophrenia
but it also causes people to like drool
constantly
and gain 200 pounds and so how effective
is it
in in the real world like i think that's
a better way to study it and this is
where i think if we want to solve that
problem like that's sort of why we you
know a lot of people like will criticize
us and i think that
criticism is fair that we offer like
mental health support services at
healthy gamer like we help parents and
we help people but we do it as coaching
instead of therapy
and what's part of the reason for that
it's because there are so many barriers
and like we actually try to meet people
where they're
at which is i think how you fix it right
so you're right that the 95
compliance issue is the big problem so
how do you fix that
i think it's like stepping away from the
rct
the reason i brought it up even to bring
us back to the previous conversation the
tie-in that i saw
was we're talking about this very
difficult to grasp concept for most
myself included
of being detached but not detached
emotionally as you described in the
buddhist model
how do we get there in a way that is
compatible
and practical with our current everyday
life when we are not living
on a mountaintop without distractions
without this thing constantly going off
great great question and so this is
where the answer is going to be weird
and you're 100 right it's actually not
compatible
you can't actually do both okay so this
is this is this is the story of buddha
right so like
buddha was a prince and he was wealthy
and powerful and all this other crap and
he was unhappy
and then like in his journey he first
like he just
peaced out like he left his wife left
his infant son
and just went on this journey of
self-fulfillment and then like
decades later he's he's going back
through his his capital city former
capital city because he gave up his
kingdom
he's walking down the street and he sees
his wife and his kid
and his wife lets him have it she's like
you piece of
you abandoned us you left you have a
responsibility to your child
you gave it all up you suck at life and
she's right
right and then so he says you know
you're right i do have a responsibility
it's my job to pass on what i understand
to my child
so he shows his wife his bagging bowl
and she's he's like let me make
up for it you've had him for 20 years
i'll take him for the next 20 years
we'll wander around india i'll have my
begging bowl and i'll teach him
everything that that i i'll do my
father's duty and she's like uh-uh
no no you crazy he's a prince there's no
way i would let him
follow around your broke ass the first
thing though it's it's interesting mike
because you're right it's not actually
compatible
if we really talk about true
enlightenment it's not in a sense
compatible with regular life if
you are if you are measuring by the
level of accomplishment of regular life
so for example if you were enlightened
would you be as successful of a youtuber
as you
are jury's still out
theoretically i think you can make a
strong case and i won't argue against
you that the answer is going to be no
in my experience so and this is where
things get really down the rabbit hole
is that the more personally detached
i've become the more
i realized so i was planning on becoming
a monk like i studied to become a monk
for a few years
and then decided to not do that
and then ultimately realize that like
being a monk is not about living on a
mountaintop it's like all
internal and so whether i'm married or
not married or
you know whether i enjoy you know like
soda i like it's all the work is
entirely internal and there i've i've
found really promising results
that you can learn to be detached and
because mike i think you've done it dude
you've
dis-intake like you've been wrapped up
in it right and as you disentangle
yourself the really bizarre thing is
that i think you will actually become
more successful
because these things as you become aware
and detached like this is where i
got to say this to you like i think it's
amazing that you're
you identify as a person who's got to
work through can't
and it's responsible for so much of your
success
and it's become maladaptive the higher
you go that which is adaptive
starts to become maladaptive which is a
beautiful lesson that you've learned
and so like if we really kind of think
about it like
as you start to detach i think you'll
actually become more successful because
i think
some of those ways that you view
yourself you say to yourself
i am not going to be some i'm not going
to let my dad down like he taught me
these
really important lessons he taught me
all these things and that's who i
am and the higher you go the more that's
going to cause you problems
and bizarrely like those helped you they
helped you become a national taekwondo
champion
they helped you become one of the most
successful medical influencers
in the history of medical influencers
and at the same time the next step
up is actually like pulling away from
some of those things
and as you become detached i think i
know it sounds weird and then you ask
the question you asked me a question
which is
how do you do that and there are ways so
we can go into that but i want to
i want to give you a chance the
mysterious ways
no they're not they're not that
mysterious it's just i i wanted to pause
for a second give you a chance to
respond
you know disagree no agree and i think
this we're coming to this similar
conclusion that i did when i was doing
my therapy
which is you know you call detached she
called a disconnect
it's all aiming towards the same
principle uh you know we get caught up
in nomenclature in science probably too
often
um so i completely agree and i think
i've already seen the benefits of doing
therapy and disconnecting some and
watching a video underperform and not
have it affect me negatively be like oh
yeah that sucks but let's figure out the
next one or
what what's my take away from this so
that we can learn from it
so yeah i absolutely think that that is
the case
um to me thinking it in a bigger picture
sense like
the concept of mindfulness or like
meditation
i've tried with a like me being a person
who's
tried a lot and accomplished a lot the
failure i have with mindfulness
and like sitting and breathing and doing
this
is like insane like how much failure
i've had with it
so it's not to say that no one can do it
it's just to say as someone who's i
consider myself a dedicated person
i cannot for the life of me do this i
start wondering is this a practical
solution for most people
the answer is absolutely yes so let me
ask you a question
right so you are are you working like uh
do you work in an academic setting or
like community setting
like you guys are residents and stuff
rotating yes so like i have i'm in a
community health center but i work with
residents
i actually have a resident shadowing me
right now for this perfect youtube
channel so if we think about it like if
you have a dedicated student
who's smart driven focused and they're
not learning medicine
where's the problem
maybe they don't want to learn medicine
no they do want to learn medicine
they're trying really hard
you know it's kind of weird medicine's
not for them no medicine could be for
that's what they would think right
that's exactly what the person would
think and that's exactly what you think
about mindfulness
it's not for me that's what i'm hearing
from you so i'm with you there
but the fault is with the teacher
so if you've got all the right stuff
right you're driven you're focused
you're dedicated
like whose fault is it it's the
attending's fault if they're not
learning medicine
and so this is where like i turn to you
and i'd say i completely get where
you're coming from because this is what
i hear
time and time and time again i suck at
meditation meditation's not for me and
that's where i'd say like
how qualified are your teachers
how did you try to learn yeah i've self
tried to self learn well there you go
right so like
meditation is something that
traditionally has been taught
by very qualified teachers and so i
don't think you're bad at meditation i i
gotta say this mike and this could
could also be a selection bias like
95 of people who i teach meditation to
first of all half i'm successful in
teaching meditation
to 95 of people that i work with half of
them feel like meditation is not
for them the first time they come into
my office and the reason
is because they don't have good teachers
and the reason is because we have a
propagation of meditation resources
without meditation teachers the reason
is because people meditation
teachers are taught in one tradition
right so like how do you become a
certified meditation teacher
you go to a particular person you learn
their particular branch of meditation
and then they are the their any to any
student comes to them they say
this is the the way to meditate and if a
teacher says this is the way to meditate
and it's not suited to your cognitive
fingerprint
then the student walks away thinking i
suck at meditation
and meditation is not for me because
look at this like
you know tibetan monk
who's like an expert on meditation if
they're such a good teacher
that like people don't acknowledge that
there are different traditions of
meditation it's sort of like if we force
you to become a surgeon
you would think that you were bad at
medicine but the whole point is that
like
you're an fm doc through and through
right and so like becoming a successful
doctor
has to do with the tradition that you're
trained in in the tradition that you
practice within
as opposed to like you know you're not a
bad doctor it's just if we force you to
become a surgeon
like does that make sense
it does um the question that i have
is um if we like for example
maybe not me let's say i have a friend
he's five foot one
and he he wants to play basketball and
by your methods any teacher a a good
teacher would be able to teach him how
to play basketball very
well but genetically he's slow he's
clumsy
he can't play on a even moderately
competitive level no matter how great
the teacher is that's
physical limitation yep
for me i feel like when i uh practice
meditation
i can pick up on it and i've gotten some
benefit from it absolutely i see it
but maybe i'm not the one that's going
to be the collegiate meditator
does that absolutely absolutely so but
but listen the five
the five foot one guy can learn how to
play basketball hundred percent can
learn how to play basketball
he may never be in the decide what to do
with it right so like but i feel like
i've learned what meditation is
how to sort of do it but then like it
didn't give me enough value to continue
doing it is that without visible
absolutely right so it may not be for
you like you can teach a five foot one
person how to play basketball you can
100 do that
i'm not saying they're gonna enjoy it
i'm not saying they're gonna play in the
mba
and enlightenment of buddhism like to
have meditation and mindfulness part of
it is that intertwined with it
sort of the solution no sort of
but let's think about a couple of
distinctions in the analogy
the goal of teaching you meditation is
not to get you to play in the nba
enlightenment is not for everyone not
everyone is temperamentally
appropriate to it so when i work with
someone who's got down syndrome
and i teach them meditation my goals are
different from if i work for you
with you right so like like the kind of
meditation
that i'm not going to teach it's not one
standard for all people
which is the problem with the nba
analogy and i think may actually be your
problem with meditation
because what you're doing is if you
really pay attention
you're setting an objective standard and
you say i
suck at meditation because i am not able
to live up to the objective standard
that's the problem because you're
meditating against an objective standard
instead of meditating to like like meet
you where you're at
it's it's right back to like you know
recommending therapy to a patient
because there's an objective standard
that's rct supported
evidence-based works here's the referral
and it doesn't go anywhere
the same problem with you because you're
saying oh i should get this out of
meditation this is the way that i should
meditate
isn't it supposed to do this forget all
that crap
if you want to learn how to meditate we
start you got
a few more minutes yeah i do
okay can i can i give it a shot
okay okay so the first question is why
do you want to meditate
to reach a state of detachment
with an emotional component still
present
okay so
okay so i feel like i'm the riddler
right now
oh no on the contrary you just dug
yourself into the biggest pit you ever
could
okay so this is what i want you to do
you want to feel an emotion
and be detached from it
you want practice at that you want me to
teach you how to do that yeah
i want you to be a shitty meditator i
want you to meditate every day
i want you to feel like a failure i want
you to feel like this doesn't work
this doesn't help i'm doing it wrong and
i want you to separate
so you we can pick any meditation
technique
and it's perfect because all you're
going to do is you're going to practice
feeling like a bad meditator
so anyway go up to 100 uh
you know women ask them for their phone
numbers get rejected by all of them and
then you get okay with rejection and you
have no fear to talk to anybody else
i think there's some overlap but if
we're really talking about what
meditation
is if you want to practice something if
you want to practice being detached from
something
i'm going to this is what we're
literally going to do i'm going to teach
you one meditation technique that you're
bad at
you'll ask god for patience and god
gives you the most frustrating
situations over and over
that's what you're giving me so
you're gonna you're gonna do any kind of
meditation that you've learned that you
suck at
then what we're gonna do is notice the
feeling of sucking at it
then i'm gonna give you a quick
breathing practice and you're just gonna
sit with it all
and like i know it sounds kind of weird
but the worse you feel like you're
doing at it just notice oh see how bad i
am
see how much it isn't working and i know
it sounds kind of weird
but the more you're able to see because
what happens is if you get tangled up
in being bad at it you're not going to
be detached you're going to be attached
does that make sense yeah how do you
find the motivation to continue doing
something you're bad at that's
my question very good so this is the
perfect technique for you
right so like like this is where and the
short answer is that you
you become detached because if you're
detached whether you're good or you're
bad doesn't matter like the five foot
one guy
who plays basketball how does someone
who's five foot one play basketball
they let go of being in the nba who
cares if i'm a failure
i just love shooting hoops man that's
how you do it you detach
that's what i'm saying it's like the
actual answer to your question it's the
actual answer to happiness
how do you find the motivation you let
go of the success
and you do it for the sake of the thing
because you enjoy doing it
not the five or one gentleman is
enjoying learning how to play basketball
as opposed to making a goal to play
in the nba and so it's it's a chicken or
egg thing because as he
lets go of the
goal to play in the nba he will enjoy
the basketball more
see that's that's the thing i need
proven to me yep
because you're saying by saying i will
get nothing from meditation or i will
fail at meditation
starting with like a really low set
point like almost a negative set point
of expectation i will then start
enjoying it
only one way to find out okay
yeah i mean yeah no this is tricky you
have to be really tricky here okay
because
if you say to yourself it won't work
mike if you say to yourself
oh i'm going to start enjoying this by
suffering through it it's not going to
work
because you're good at that right you're
good at making temporary sacrifices for
success in the end
no no no you're going to fail if you do
that so what do i do
you have to do it with knowing it'll
never work
you have to you can't trick yourself
because that's it's gonna be the same
thing
because then what's gonna happen is
you're gonna you're gonna start to
meditate you're saying it's not to work
but i'm going to start
enjoying it at some point i'm going to
walk up to 100 girls
and and then i'll get good at it because
in the back your mind you're going to
know i'm going to get good at it
and then what's going to feel like a
failure you're going to do it 100 times
and you're not going to be good at it
and then you're going to feel like a
failure oh it's not working it's not
working it was supposed to work but it's
not working it's not working it's not
working
so you see what i'm saying there you
gotta be careful sneaky sneaky
i i understand the the complexity of it
it just
to me it's i i'm gonna try i'm honestly
gonna give it a try uh
to me it sounds like there's like knobs
like okay turn down expectation
turn down expectation of not having an
expectation
and it's like i don't like who i don't
know like i don't i don't think i have
that good control over my
mental state but i'll try yes you
understand it perfectly mike
and when you can turn down knobs all the
way to infinity
that is enlightenment yeah i mean i'm
more than willing to try it
okay so now you're gonna teach us some
meditation okay
you get it you get it bro you're you're
on this you you're you're good
you figured it out seriously i'm i'm
very optimistic for you
it's gonna suck i'm sorry and it's not
gonna amount to anything
see but i know you're lying you know
it's gonna amount to something
no i don't i don't you do i heard you i
heard you give the intellectual
statement earlier no because because as
long no no no because
as long as you believe that i think it's
going to be successful
you think it's going to be successful
and then it's going to fail
so it's not going to do i lie to myself
nope
you just do the practice and then you
practice you notice
like the more knobs you see the better
you're gonna get at it
okay okay and then i'm actually tricking
you into a completely different
direction but we'll
worry about that later okay so this is
what i want you to do i want you to just
share with us
yeah a meditation practice that you've
tried you're doing great bro
love it um like uh just anything
four four second inhale eight second
exhale
diaphragmatic breathing beautiful okay
so what we're gonna do
is let me just think for a second
okay so this is what we're gonna do all
right
so we're gonna do four seconds of
inhalation followed by eight seconds of
exhalation we're gonna do like let's say
five
rounds of that and what i want you to do
as you're breathing is notice that there
may be thoughts in your mind
of this isn't working or this doesn't
feel like working or whatever
and then as you notice those thoughts
just like notice them like
prepare for it right it's like this
person's got an sd elevation
on the ekg when i look at the echo this
is what i'm going to be looking for
right
so we're going to like look for it and
then as it arises you're just going to
see it
and then after the five rounds of
breathing
i want you to see how long the feeling
of
this is a waste of my time i'm not doing
it right
this will work in the end just see how
how long those feelings kind of last
and then what i want you to do is try to
find the moment
where inhalation becomes exhalation
after the five rounds after the five
rounds
uh-huh i'm not sure i grasp what that
means
that's that's good so like you know we
have an
inhalation and then we have an
exhalation right you can observe that
there's a period of time where you're
inhaling and you can observe
the time that you're exhaling and in
between that
as long as you don't hold your breath
there's gonna be like a moment where one
becomes the next
and i want you to try to catch that
moment okay
okay hey you want me just now
yeah let's do it now we're gonna do it
together so can you count for us
like for the first round like show us i
i like to do it mentally but i guess i
can do it
okay okay okay then do it mentally can i
count with the first round
please yeah okay a guided session i like
it okay okay so we're
so i'm gonna i'll count the first let's
uh i'll count the first round and then
continue i'm fine with it if you prefer
it that way
let me just think about how i want to do
this no we're going to do just the first
one
okay okay this is what i do to my
patients
when i want to check their reflexes on
their knee and they won't let me do it
so i make them
pull their hands up and look up at the
ceiling and then their reflexes come
back
that's what you're doing to me it's a
scene right through me
okay all right so
i've met my match okay so we're gonna
we're gonna just take start
with just take a moment to feel the
weight of your body in the chair
okay so now we're gonna take a deep
breath in expanding your diaphragm
pushing out your stomach
one two three
four and then exhale for eight seconds
four five 6
7 8. and now again
breathe in one two
three four and breathe out
one two three
four five six
seven eight and now continue at your own
pace
we'll practice for about 60 seconds
just continue breathing i'll prompt you
when to stop
us
please
go ahead and finish the breath that
you're on
and now just observe yourself
see if there are sensations of
feeling like you didn't do a good job
like you should have done better
and we'll let you just pay attention to
thoughts and feelings as they arise
for another
45 seconds or so
and now i want you to take a deep breath
in
and exhale
and again
exhale
and then a third time in
and out as the final breath
as you finish your expiration go ahead
and
or exhalation go ahead and open your
eyes
tell me what happened
when you stopped counting and i started
to have to count for myself
i cannot count i lose track of the
numbers
so that happens i started worrying about
my 5 45 meeting
i thought about some emails that i
should have received today that i didn't
okay that's that's the majority of the
thoughts okay
so you have a goal for meditation now
i'm gonna be a teacher and i'm gonna
teach you one more technique
okay okay this is what you
i think you need so i'm going to teach
you a technique called nari shodhana or
alternate nostril breathing have you
ever learned this before
okay can you do this with your right
hand
so bring your index yep very good now
just let the thumb out
perfect yeah it could be like that
that's fine okay
i think it's pretty good yeah yeah it's
so what we're going to do is i'm going
to take
my right thumb and i'm going to block my
right nostril and i'm going to breathe
in through my left
allergies are making this a little hard
okay
and then once you have a full breath of
air once you inhale
then we're gonna switch and exhale out
the other side
and now we're going to inhale again
through this side
switch and exhale
good inhale
don't switch it inhale
it's gonna be tough because you've got
allergies
switch and exhale
inhale
switch exhale
you got the rhythm of it so let's pause
for a second maybe tough with allergies
i understand that
but i want what i want you to do is
inhale with through one nostril
switch and complete the breath out the
other side then you
start with the same side again and
switch on a
full full total lung capacity filled to
the brim okay
okay i hate that i know what you're
doing what am i what am i doing
i'm not doing anything now seriously
sorry go ahead sorry go ahead what am i
doing tell me
you're not doing anything no you're
you're uh you're distracting my mind
you're giving me an activity to do
good okay so close your eyes 60 seconds
alternate nostril breathing
why is this so hard for me to do it's
okay you can you can
do with my pinky okay pinky is great
yeah okay
okay so start with the right right
nostril blood good in
switch out
in
good now the training wheels are coming
off you do it at your own pace we're
going to do it for 45 seconds
i'll keep track of the count you just
focus on not screwing up the breath
my
okay
go ahead and finish the breath that
you're on
how was that good
what does good mean
i feel like my breathing is slowed down
i also feel like my brain is wondering
if i have a deviated septum or true
allergies and why my left nostril
is so congested but
i i also hate that i appreciate what
you're doing like in the sense of
like my brain is like oh this is a
distraction method so this is what
you're doing and it's
it's rationalizing it i wish it wouldn't
but
yeah so control it so yep so don't
control it just continue the practice
okay so like your problem mike
is that the meditation you're trying is
too easy
so you need something called a powerful
alumni and this is where i have to i
have to beg your
if this doesn't work for you i have to
beg the opportunity to have another shot
at it okay okay i'm gonna i'm gonna try
it what's up
what's the prescription how often when
you i want you to practice for five
minutes
whenever you like i would say three
times a week
five times a week but just
yeah three five minutes five times a
week
okay okay and and this is where
so what you need is a powerful alumna an
alumni is the sanskrit word for support
you need something that there's so much
going on in your mind
you're actually so good at multitasking
you can juggle so many things at the
same time
that you actually need a very intensive
technique
that will demand all of your attention
so i'm going to leave you with one other
technique don't try this one yet but
just as an example
you need to stand with one foot you need
to balance on
one foot with your eyes closed that's
going to be your form of meditation
you can't try any of this new
observation stuff because your mind is
going to fill that vacuum
you need a very powerful focusing
technique
and i the why why this makes a lot of
sense to me specifically at a practical
level is
for example if i was to and my
headphones listen to an audible book
right now sitting here there's no way i
could listen to it
but while i'm driving to the hospital
and i'm busy with the stimuli of driving
and doing all these things
i can grasp the most complex subjects
whereas like if i'm just sitting i have
no idea what the speakers this is a
deficiency of your prior teachers
because your mind needs to be occupied
so the way that you keep your mind from
wandering is by keeping it focused on
one thing
alluringly enough imagine you're doing
pediatric
physical exam on a kid what do you do
right you're like oh hey why don't you
play with my stethoscope while i look in
your ears
you're right you recognize what i'm
doing you get the principle and it still
works
it's not about manipulation it's about
providing a technique for your mind that
it can sit in one place
and giving it what it needs to it's like
training a dog where you give it a treat
first and then it learns how to fetch
then it no longer needs the treat so we
need to train your mind to be able to do
this we'll give it the alumni the
support it needs at the beginning
and then as you get better at it you're
not going to need the alumni and then
you'll know how to meditate
hoping that is the case
okay my balance also sucks so if i fall
uh
is there malpractice coverage here there
is not because it is not a medical
conversation
it is not medical advice i am not your
doctor
now i hate our legal system yeah
there is not malpractice coverage for
standing on one foot
on the west side highway of all places i
was literally just
discussing with my producer about doing
a video about giving medical advice
and how complicated it is like when my
friends call and say like hey i'm dizzy
what should i do
and i i just had that in the back of my
mind because we just had this
conversation but
it was just crazy how complicated so i
applaud you for doing this
on social media and on twitch and
youtube
yeah of course thank you very much so dr
mike it's been a pleasure i know you've
got a uh
with something in what sounds like 20
minutes so i want to give you enough
time
thank you so much for coming on i i
really enjoyed this
um do you want to just tell people very
quickly where they can find you
i mean i assume everyone already knows
but yeah well i'm the only uh
apparently dr mike or at least the the
one that comes up most when you search
so if you just search dr mike on youtube
instagram twitter facebook all that good
stuff so just search dr mike and if you
ever have a topic you're curious about
like
cholesterol or what happens when you
swallow gum
just search dr mike gum dr my
cholesterol all those videos will pop up
for you
that's awesome thank you for the
opportunity yes this has been an
enlightening session
i didn't reach enlightenment which is
not for everybody as you say but it was
a very enlightening session and
uh i love having these types of
conversations so thank you for that
opportunity yeah good luck to you man
yeah and give me a chance if it doesn't
work okay oh i
i'm your i'm your discord friend now
that's it okay so now
i'm gonna hit you up okay cool take care
man bye all right thanks
all right he's a fantastic guy you know
i think i i mean i saw some stuff
earlier i
i think you know some people don't like
him and you know no one's perfect as
he's
said before but man the dude is really
fantastic like just super genuine dude